---
layout: default
title: "HIST362: Modern Revolutions"
course_description: "An exploration of the political and social revolutions that have shaped the modern world between the 18th and 20th centuries, with particular emphasis on their causes and lasting global impact."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "HIST362: Modern Revolutions"
-------------------------------------------------

In the 1970s, the Chinese Communist leader Zhou Enlai was asked to
assess the outcomes of the French Revolution of 1789.  He supposedly
answered: “It is too soon to say.”  Though this story has a somewhat
apocryphal status, it captures a fundamental truth about the world in
which we live: it is a world which has been shaped by revolutions, and
their legacies are always difficult to evaluate. In this course, you
will gain a better understanding of the modern world by studying some of
the most important political revolutions that took place between the
17<sup>th</sup> century and today.  You will seek to understand the
causes of each revolution, analyze the ideologies that inspired the
revolutionaries, examine revolutionary uses of violence, and consider
how historical revolutions still shape contemporary politics.  Close and
critical readings of historical sources will be crucial in this process.
The course begins with a theoretical analysis of revolutions and a
careful examination of pre-revolutionary Europe and the Enlightenment. 
Subsequent units examine the English Revolution of the 17<sup>th</sup>
century; the American and the French Revolutions, which are often
described as the crucible of modernity; the Mexican Revolution, which
changed the history of Latin America; the Russian and the Chinese
Revolutions, which sought to create Marxist states; the Iranian
Revolution, which created an Islamic Republic; and finally, the Eastern
European revolutions of 1989, which brought about radical changes
without recourse to violence. By the end of the course, you will be able
to identify commonalities and differences among these revolutions and
understand how—individually and collectively—they transformed the modern
world.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able
to:  
    
 ? Provide a concise historical narrative of each of the revolutions
presented in the course.  
    
 ? Identify the origins and causes of each revolution, and compare
revolutions with respect to their causes.  
    
 ? Analyze the goals and ideals of the revolutionaries, and compare how
these functioned in various modern revolutions.  
    
 ? Discuss how revolutions in various parts of the world have affected
women’s rights.  
    
 ? Analyze how religious and secular worldviews came into conflict
during times of upheaval and revolution.  
    
 ? Discuss the patterns and dynamics of revolutionary violence, and
evaluate how revolutionaries have used nonviolent tactics against
oppressive regimes  
    
 ? Evaluate connections between revolutionary ideologies and
revolutionary events.  
    
 ? Analyze how the legacies of each revolution are present in modern
politics..  
    
 ? Describe and evaluate competing theoretical models of revolutionary
change.  
    
 ? Interpret primary historical documents.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have access to a computer.  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access.  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.
Adobe Reader or Flash).  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.).  
  
 √    Have competency in the English language.  
  
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook.](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf)  
  
 √    Have completed the following courses from “[The Core
Program](http://www.saylor.org/majors/history/)” of the history
discipline: [HIST102](http://www.saylor.org/courses/hist102/),
[HIST103](http://www.saylor.org/courses/hist103/), and
[HIST104](http://www.saylor.org/courses/hist104/).

### Course Information

Welcome to HIST362. Below, please find general information on this
course and its requirements.   
    
 **Primary Resources:** This course is composed of a range of different
free, online materials. However, it makes primary use of the following
materials:  

-   CosmoLearning: University of Houston: Professor Thomas O’Brien’s
    “*[World
    Revolutions](http://www.cosmolearning.com/video-lectures/lecture-1a-9059/)*”
    Course
-   U.S. Library of Congress’ *[Country
    Studies](http://countrystudies.us/)*
-   George Mason University: Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New
    Media’s *[Exploring the French
    Revolution](http://chnm.gmu.edu/revolution/)* and *[Making the
    History of 1989](http://chnm.gmu.edu/1989/)*
-   *[The Historical Text Archive](http://historicaltextarchive.com/)*
-   Fordham University’s *[Internet Modern History
    Sourcebook](http://www.fordham.edu/Halsall/mod/modsbook.asp)*
-   Columbia University’s *[Asia for
    Educators](http://afe.easia.columbia.edu/)*

**Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials.
 Pay special attention to Unit 1, as this lays the groundwork for
understanding the more advanced, exploratory material presented in the
later units.  You will also need to complete:  

-   The Final Exam 

Note that you will only receive an official grade on your Final Exam.
 However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
work through the quizzes and problem sets listed above.  
    
 At the end of the course you will also need to complete the Final
Exam.  In order to “pass” this course, you will need to earn a 70% or
higher on the Final Exam.  Your score on the exam will be tabulated as
soon as you complete it.  If you do not pass the exam, you may take it
again.  
    
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of
approximately **137.25 hours** to complete.  Each unit includes a “time
advisory” that lists the amount of time you are expected to spend on
each subunit.  These should help you plan your time.  It may be useful
to take a look at these advisories and to determine how much time you
have over the next few weeks to complete each unit, and then to set
goals for yourself.  For example, Unit 1 should take you 4 hours. 
Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and decide to complete
subunits 1.1 and 1.2 (1.5 hours) on Monday night, and subunits 1.3 and
1.4 (2.5 hours) on Tuesday night.  Then, move on to Unit 2 and complete
subunit 2.1 (3 hours) on Wednesday night; subunit 2.3 (2.5 hours) on
Thursday night; etc.   
    

